In this lecture, we will discuss
what a validation set is and
how it relates to overfitting and
model performance evaluation.
After this video, you will be able to
describe how validation sets can be
used to avoid overfitting.
Articulate how training,
validation, and test sets are used.
And list three ways that
validation can be performed.
In our lesson on classification,
we discussed that there is a training
phase in which the model is built, and
a testing phase in which
the model is applied to new data.
The model is built using training data and
evaluated on test data.
The training and
test data are two different datasets.
The goal in building a machine learning
model is to have the model perform well
on the training set, as well as generalize
well on new data in the test set.
Recall that a model that overfits
does not generalize well to new data.
Recall also that overfitting generally
occurs when a model is too complex.
So to have a model with good
generalization performance,
model training has to stop before
the model gets too complex.
How do you determine
when this should occur?
A validation set can be used to guide the
training process to avoid overfitting and
deliver good generalization performance.
We have discussed having a training
set and a separate test set.
The training set is used
to build a model and
the test set is used to see how
the model performs a new data.
Now we want to further divide up
the training data into a training set and
a validation set.
The training set is used to
train the model as before and
the validation set is used to determine
when to stop training the model
to avoid overfitting, in order to get
the best generalization performance.
The idea is to look at the errors
on both training set and
validation set during model
training as shown here.
The orange solid line on the plot
is the training error and
the green line is the validation error.
We see that as model building
progresses along the x-axis,
the number of nodes increases.
That is the complexity
of the model increases.
We can see that as the model complexity
increases, the training error decreases.
On the other hand, the validation
error initially decreases but
then starts to increase.
When the validation error increases, this
indicates that the model is overfitting,
resulting in decreased
generalization performance.
This can be used to determine
when to stop training.
Where validation error starts to increase
is when you get the best generalization
performance, so
training should stop there.
This method of using a validation set
to determine when to stop training
is referred to as model selection
since you're selecting one from
many of varying complexities.
Note that this was illustrated for
a decision tree classifier, but
the same method can be applied to
any type of machine learning model.
There are several ways to create and use
the validation set to avoid overfitting.
The different methods are holdout method,
random subsampling,
k-fold cross-validation,
and leave-one-out cross-validation.
The first way to use a validation
set is the holdout method.
This describes the scenario
that we have been discussing,
where part of the training data
is reserved as a validation set.
The validation set is
then the holdout set.
Errors on the training set and the holdout
set are calculated at each step
during model training and
plotted together as we've seen before.
And the lowest error on the holdout
set is when training should stop.
This is the just the process that
we have described here before.
There's some limitations to
the holdout method however.
First, since some samples are reserved for
the holdout validation set,
the training set now has less data
than it originally started out with.
Secondly, if the training and holdout sets
do not have the same data distributions,
then the results will be misleading.
For example, if the training data has
many more samples of one class and
the holdout dataset has many
more samples of another class.
The next method for using
a validation set is repeated holdout.
As the name implies,
this is essentially repeating
the holdout method several times.
With each iteration, samples are randomly
selected from the original training data
to create the holdout validation set.
This is repeated several times with
different training and validation sets.
Then the iterates on the holdout set for
the different iterations
are averaged together to get the overall
iterate for model selection.
A potential problem with repeated holdout
is that you could end up with some samples
being used more than others for training.
Since a sample can be used for either
testing or training any number of times,
some samples may be put in the training
set more times than other samples.
So you might end up with some
samples being overrepresented while
other samples are underrepresented
in training or testing.
A way to improve on the repeated
holdout method is use cross-validation.
Cross-validation works as follows.
Segment the data into k number
of disjoint partitions.
During each iteration, one partition
is used as the validation set.
Repeat the process k times.
Each time using a different partition for
validation.
So each partition is used for
validation exactly once.
This is illustrated in this figure.
In the fist iteration, the first
partition, specified in green, is used for
validation.
In the second iteration,
the second partition is used for
validation and so on.
The overall validation error is calculated
by averaging the validation errors for
all k iterations.
The model with the smallest average
validation error then is selected.
The process we just described is
referred to as k-fold cross-validation.
This is a very commonly used approach
to model selection in practice.
This approach gives you a more structured
way to divide available data up between
training and validation datasets and
provides a way to overcome the variability
in performance that you can get when
using a single partitioning of the data.
Leave-one-out cross-validation
is a special case of k-fold
cross-validation where k equals N,
where N is the size of your dataset.
Here, for each iteration the validation
set has exactly one sample.
So the model is trained to
using N minus one samples and
is validated on the remaining sample.
The rest of the process works the same
way as regular k-fold cross-validation.
Note that cross-validation is often
abbreviated CV and leave-one-out
cross-validation is in abbreviated
L-O-O-C-V and pronounced LOOCV.
We have described several ways to use
a validation set to address overfitting.
Error on the validation set is used
to determine when to stop training so
that the model does not overfit.
Note that the validation error that comes
out of this process can also be used
to estimate generalization
performance of the model.
In other words,
the error on the validation set provides
an estimate of the error on the test set.
With the addition of the validation set,
you really need three distinct
datasets when you build a model.
Let's review these datasets.
The training dataset is used to train the
model, that is to adjust the parameters of
the model to learn the input
to output mapping.
The validation dataset is used to
determine when training should stop
in order to avoid overfitting.
The test data set is used to evaluate
the performance of the model on new data.
Note that the test data set should never,
ever be used in any way to create or
tune the model.
It should not be used, for
example, in a cross-validation process
to determine when to stop training.
The test dataset must always remain
independent from model training and
remain untouched until the very end
when all training has been completed.
Note that in sampling the original dataset
to create the training, validation, and
test sets, all datasets must contain the
same distribution of the target classes.
For example, if in the original dataset,
70% of the samples belong to one class and
30% to the other class, then this same
distribution should approximately
be present in each of the training,
validation, and test sets.
Otherwise, analysis results
will be misleading.
To summarize, we have discuss the need for
three different datasets
in building model.
A training set to train the model,
a validation set to determine when to stop
training, and a test to evaluate
performance on new data.
We learned how a validation set can
be used to avoid overfitting and
in the process, provide an estimate
of generalization performance.
And we covered different
ways to create and
use a validation set such
as k-fold cross-validation.